Grain Formatter Blog Post (#246)
grain-lang/grain-lang.org: src_blog/_posts/Grain-Formatter.md

---
title: Introducing the Grain Formatter
subtitle: Bringing consistency and pretty code to Grain
date: 2021-08-31 12:00:00
author: Marcus Roberts
cover: /blog/photos/cover/aaron-burden-FGbLYvTgxx0-unsplash.jpg
coverAttribution: AAron Burden / Unsplash
tags: Tooling, Developer Experience, 
---

> For any modern programming language to succeed it needs to provide developers the support tools they have become used to: code editor extensions, IDE support and in recent years code formatting or pretty print tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any modern programming language to succeed, it needs to provide developers the support tools they have become used to: code editor extensions, IDE support and in recent years code formatting or pretty print tools.
```
Not sure if this was the comma war you were talking about, so I'll come with a citation :joy:
https://www.grammarly.com/blog/subordinate-clause/
> When a subordinate clause begins a sentence, it has a comma after it.

> For any modern programming language to succeed it needs to provide developers the support tools they have become used to – code editor extensions, IDE support and in recent years code formatting or prettier tools.

Author: I've used a colon instead  for the following list :-D

The acceptance of automatic code formatting tools as providing the “one true style” for development in a language seems to have really caught on with the release of Prettier for Javascript.   More than a linter that reports on how well a piece of code adheres to style and best practices, a code formatter rewrites a piece of code in the approved style.

> This really helps codebases and teams in several ways.   It reduces arguments at code review time as the correct style is guaranteed.  It helps new members of the team learn the coding style, it keeps a very consistent code base that’s easy to read by everyone.   My personal favourite is I can be really lazy as I type code, and with format on save enabled I just press save and watch the code become well structured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This really helps codebases and teams in several ways. It reduces arguments at code review time, as the correct style is guaranteed. It helps new members of the team learn the coding style, it keeps a very consistent code base that’s easy to read by everyone. My personal favourite is I can be really lazy as I type code, and with `Format on Save` enabled, I just press `Save` and watch the code become well structured.
```

## Grainformat

> The formatter can be invoked using the Grain cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The formatter can be invoked using the Grain CLI
```

```sh
grain format myfile.gr
```

or 

```sh
grain format  
``` 

> which will read from stdin.
> 
> Both write the reformatted code to stdout.
> 
> Coming soon will be a check mode and an in-place rewrite mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which will read from stdin, and both write the reformatted code to stdout. In the near future, there will be a check mode and an in-place rewrite mode.
```
@marcusroberts maybe add a blurb about what the "check mode" will do?

Author: Thanks, done

> The LSP in the VSCode language extension for Grain now supports whole document formatting, so if you enable Format On Save it will reformat all the code each time you save.    Formatting code sections will be in the next release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LSP in the VSCode language extension for Grain now supports whole document formatting, so if you enable `Format On Save` it will reformat all the code each time you save. Code section formatting will be in the next release.
```
Putting "Format On Save" in teletype (also done in a previous suggestion) is me editorializing. Feel free to accept or reject.

> The LSP in the VSCode language extension for Grain now supports whole document formatting, so if you enable `Format On Save` it will reformat all the code each time you save. Code section formatting will be in the next release.

Author: Changed locally

> Coming soon will be a check mode and an in-place rewrite mode.  Check mode scans code for a proper match to the formatter style without reformatting - useful for CI checks to ensure all code is properly formatted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coming soon will be a check mode and an in-place rewrite mode.  Check mode will scan code and determine if it matches the formatter style without reformatting — useful for CI checks to ensure all code is properly formatted.
```

## Example of formatting choices

The primary role of the formatter is to make sure no line exceeds the specified maximum and breaks the code across multiple lines in a consistent way.  Much of getting the formatter right is choosing where those breaks should come.

> We've had some help here - we use the fantastic pretty printer that ships with the ReScript formatter and so the job of the Grain formatter is to output the Grain source in the intermediate language that the pretty printer understands.  It does all the hard work of calculating what can fit onto one line and breaking as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've had some help here — we use the fantastic pretty printer that ships with the ReScript formatter, so the job of the Grain formatter is simply to output the Grain source in the intermediate language that the pretty printer understands.  It does all the hard work of calculating what can fit onto one line and breaking it as needed.
```

> We've had some help here — we use the fantastic pretty printer that ships with the ReScript formatter, so the job of the Grain formatter is simply to output the Grain source in the intermediate language that the pretty printer understands.  It does all the hard work of calculating what can fit onto one line and breaking it as needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've had some help here—we use the fantastic pretty printer that ships with the [ReScript syntax](https://github.com/rescript-lang/syntax).  The primary job of the Grain formatter is to map the Grain compiler output into the intermediate language that the pretty printer understands, where it does all the hard work of calculating what can fit onto one line and breaking it as needed.
```
I think it's the least we can do to link to the repo.

> The main formatting rules are to do with code indenting.  This is what really helps make the code base look consistent.  Always 2 spaces (and let’s not get started on tabs vs spaces)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main formatting rules have to do with code indentation. This is what really helps make the code base look consistent. Always 2 spaces (and let’s not get started on tabs vs spaces)!
```

> How curly braces should be used for block layouts is another important stylistic choice. The most common styles are Egyptian versus C-style, and we’ve gone for Egyptian:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Curly brace usage in block layouts is another important stylistic choice. The most common styles are Egyptian versus C-style, and we’ve gone for Egyptian:
```

```sh
if (conditional) {
 ...
} else {
 ...
}
```

> There are many choices when it comes to spacing around lists of items, be that function parameters, tuples, lists, arrays, record entries, enums, etc.  We add spaces after the separating comments, and before items in some cases.   When a list of items breaks over multiple lines, we add a trailing comma to make adding extra items easier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many choices when it comes to spacing around lists of items, be that function parameters, tuples, lists, arrays, record entries, enums, etc. We add spaces after the separating comments, and before items in some cases. When a list of items breaks over multiple lines, we add a trailing comma to make adding extra items easier:
```

```sh
(a,b) and [1,2,3] and  {name:"Super",    value:"Grain"}
```

becomes
```sh
(a, b) and [1, 2, 3] and { name: "Super", value: "Grain" } 
```

> or if it split over lines we add a trailing the comma:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or, if it is split over multiple lines, we add a trailing comma:
```

```sh
enum Animals { 
  Dog, 
  Cat,
}
```

> We apply some smaller styling choices too, for example a single argument function isn’t wrapped with parenthesis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We apply some smaller stylistic choices too, for example a single-argument function isn’t wrapped with parentheses. 
```

> We apply some smaller stylistic choices too, for example a single-argument function isn’t wrapped with parentheses. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We apply some smaller stylistic choices, too. For example, a single-argument function isn’t wrapped with parentheses. 
```
nit

> (a,b) and [1,2,3] and  {name:"Super",    value:"Grain"}

Reviewer 3: Grain uses `&&` 😛 

Confirmed that this does not work with the formatter!
```suggestion
(a,b) && [1,2,3] &&  {name:"Super",    value:"Grain"}
```

Author: This was pseudocode, I was too lazy to make multiple lines but I can fix

Author: as you have :-D

> ```sh

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```grain
```

```sh
let add1 = x => x + 1
let add = (x, y) => x + y
```

> Also quite important is the ability to tag code as not to be formatted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also quite important is the ability to tag code as not to be formatted:
```

> (a, b) and [1, 2, 3] and { name: "Super", value: "Grain" } 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(a, b) && [1, 2, 3] && { name: "Super", value: "Grain" } 
```

> ```sh

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```grain
```

```sh
// formatter-ignore
```

> Use the formatter-ignore annotation in a comment and the following statement will be reproduced as-is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `formatter-ignore` annotation in a comment, and the following statement will be untouched by the formatter.
```

> # Implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Implementation
```
no h1 headers except for the auto generated one.

> ```sh

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```grain
```

> The formatter works by using the Grain compiler to first parse the source code into what's called an Abstract Syntax Tree or AST that captures the meaning of the program as a tree of patterns and expressions.    Then we just write the tree back out as valid Grain code.  That's sometimes easier said than done, and here are some of the challenges we faced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The formatter works by using the Grain compiler to first parse the source code into what's called an Abstract Syntax Tree, or AST, which captures the meaning of the program as a tree of patterns, statements, and expressions. Then we just write the tree back out as valid Grain code. That's sometimes easier said than done, and here are some of the challenges we faced:
```

> ## Challenges

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Challenges
```
switch this to an h3 then?

> -	Comments.   Comments are by definition ignored when the compiler is comprehending the meaning of our code and so isn't stored in the AST.  We need to take the AST and the comments extracted from the source, bring the regenerated code and comments back together and check how the code looks with comments when formatting.   In some of the more esoteric applications of comments, their placement can be ambiguous in relation to source code that also doesn’t appear in the AST, for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-	Comments.   Comments are, by definition, ignored when the compiler is comprehending the meaning of our code, and so they aren't stored in the AST. When formatting, however, we need to preserve them. To this end, we extract these comments and combine them with the AST and bring the regenerated code and comments back together, checking how the code looks along the way. In some of the more esoteric applications of comments, their placement can be ambiguous in relation to source code that also doesn’t appear in the AST, for example:
```
I editorialized this one a bit heavily; feel free to revise.

```sh
variable1 /* comment */ , variable2
```

> We know the locations (source code ranges) of the variable names and the comment, but we don’t know if the comment comes before or after the comma.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our AST encodes the locations of the variable names and the comment, but we don’t know if the comment comes before or after the comma.
```

> -	We use various forms of syntactic sugar.  One of my favourites is converting list syntax of [1,2,3] into repeated application of the list cons operator.    The formatter needs to be aware of these and rewrite the AST back out in sugared syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-	Grain uses various forms of syntactic sugar.  One of my favourites is converting list syntax of `[1,2,3]` into repeated application of the list `cons` operator. The formatter needs to be aware of these and rewrite the AST back out in sugared syntax.
```

> ```sh

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```grain
```

> - Blanks lines are useful for structuring and organising code but also need to be styled for consistency.  Removing all blank lines really impacts on how the source code looks and reads.    We chose to compress multiple blank lines down into a single blank line, but to always retain at least one blank line wherever one was found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Blanks lines are useful for structuring and organising code but also need to be styled for consistency.  Removing all blank lines really impacts on how the source code looks and reads. We chose to compress multiple blank lines down into a single blank line, but to always retain at least one blank line wherever one was found.
```

> - Blanks lines are useful for structuring and organising code but also need to be styled for consistency.  Removing all blank lines really impacts on how the source code looks and reads. We chose to compress multiple blank lines down into a single blank line, but to always retain at least one blank line wherever one was found.

Author: Well spotted!

> -	Arguments over style.  As you might imagine we had quite a lot of discussion about style choices.  There really is no true way that suits everyone, and whatever is chosen will always be a compromise.   However what we wanted to avoid was adding configurable formatting where different formatting choices can be specified.  This really undoes the premise of all formatted Grain code looking the same, which we think really helps all Grain programmers, new or experienced, to look at Grain code and find it easy to read through because of the consistency, be than in end user code or the standard libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-	Arguments over style. As you might imagine we had quite a lot of discussion about style choices. There really is no single way that suits everyone, and whatever is chosen will always be a compromise. However, what we wanted to avoid was adding configurable formatting where different formatting choices can be specified.  This really undermines the premise of all formatted Grain code looking the same, which we think really helps all Grain programmers, new or experienced, to look at Grain code and find it easy to read through because of the consistency, be than in end user code or the standard libraries.
```

> -	Arguments over style. As you might imagine we had quite a lot of discussion about style choices. There really is no single way that suits everyone, and whatever is chosen will always be a compromise. However, what we wanted to avoid was adding configurable formatting where different formatting choices can be specified.  This really undermines the premise of all formatted Grain code looking the same, which we think really helps all Grain programmers, new or experienced, to look at Grain code and find it easy to read through because of the consistency, be than in end user code or the standard libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-	Arguments over style. As you might imagine, we had quite a lot of discussion about style choices. There really is no single way that suits everyone, and whatever is chosen will always be a compromise. However, what we wanted to avoid was adding configurable formatting where different formatting choices can be specified.  This really undermines the premise of all formatted Grain code looking the same, which we think really helps all Grain programmers, new or experienced, to look at Grain code and find it easy to read through because of the consistency, be than in end user code or the standard libraries.
```
Subordinate clause 😛

Author: :-D

> -	How far should the rewriting go?   	Some formatters go further than we have in rewriting code.  We’ve seen some for example that will examine if statements and rewrite them as ternaries if appropriate.   So far we’ve not gone that far.   There are a couple of places where we might make changes from the original code, for example syntactic sugar for statements such as x += x.   This may have been written as x = x + 1.   Both are identical in the AST representation, and without examining the unparsed source we can’t tell what the coder actually wrote.  Feedback on whether this is acceptable, good or needs fixing will be very welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-	How far should the rewriting go? Some formatters go further than we have in rewriting code. For example, we’ve seen some which will examine `if` statements and rewrite them using ternary operators if appropriate. So far, we’ve not gone that far. There are a couple of places where we might make changes from the original code. For example, syntactic sugar for statements such as `x += 1` may have been written as `x = x + 1`; both are identical in the AST representation, and without examining the unparsed source we can’t tell what the coder actually wrote. Feedback on whether this is acceptable, good or needs fixing will be very welcome!
```

> We hope you find the Grain formatter useful.  Please report any mis-formatting through Github issues.  If you get really stuck you can use for formatter-ignore annotation to avoid the formatter from changing the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you find the Grain formatter useful. Please report any mis-formatting through [GitHub issues](https://github.com/grain-lang/grain/issues). If you get really stuck, you can use for `formatter-ignore` annotation to avoid the formatter from changing your code.
```

> This is just the first version, and we look forward to bringing in-place reformatting and format checking very soon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is just the first version, and we look forward to bringing in-place reformatting and format checking very soon!
```

> -	How far should the rewriting go? Some formatters go further than we have in rewriting code. For example, we’ve seen some which will examine `if` statements and rewrite them using ternary operators if appropriate. So far, we’ve not gone that far. There are a couple of places where we might make changes from the original code. For example, syntactic sugar for statements such as `x += 1` may have been written as `x = x + 1`; both are identical in the AST representation, and without examining the unparsed source we can’t tell what the coder actually wrote. Feedback on whether this is acceptable, good or needs fixing will be very welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-	How far should the rewriting go? Some formatters go further than we have in rewriting code. For example, we’ve seen some which will examine `if` statements and rewrite them using ternary operators if appropriate. So far, we’ve not gone that far. There are a couple of places where we might make changes from the original code. For example, syntactic sugar for statements such as `x += 1` may have been written as `x = x + 1`; both are identical in the AST representation, and without examining the unparsed source we can’t tell what the coder actually wrote. Feedback on whether this is acceptable, good, or needs fixing will be very welcome!
```
big :heart: for the Oxford comma

> -	How far should the rewriting go? Some formatters go further than we have in rewriting code. For example, we’ve seen some which will examine `if` statements and rewrite them using ternary operators if appropriate. So far, we’ve not gone that far. There are a couple of places where we might make changes from the original code. For example, syntactic sugar for statements such as `x += 1` may have been written as `x = x + 1`; both are identical in the AST representation, and without examining the unparsed source we can’t tell what the coder actually wrote. Feedback on whether this is acceptable, good, or needs fixing will be very welcome!

Reviewer 3: > rewrite them using ternary operators if appropriate. So far, we’ve not gone that far.

Should we say this? Grain doesn't currently have (or really even have plans to support) a ternary operator.

Author: We can cut it, it's a example of what I remember the Reason reformatter used to do.

Author: I changed to to make clearer this was for other languages.
